# ELEC2232 - Applied Electromagnetism 2022-23

## Module overview

This module introduces and develops the knowledge in fundamental electromagnetics for second year Electrical and Electronic Engineering students. The course presents the basic concepts of electromagnetic theory from a physical and application points of view. The vector algebra used in electromagnetic theory is introduced in the electromagnetic field context. The course concentrates on applications of the theory to practical problems, so that students gain a better understanding of the electromagnetic field theory through problem solving exercises. The students should have covered in their first year Mathematics for Electronic and Electrical Engineering (MATH1055) and Electric Materials and Fields course (ELEC1206).

## Details

- **School:** School of Electronics and Computer Science
- **Module Code:** ELEC2232
- **Credit Points:** 15
- **Level:** Level 5

## Staff

- **Module Lead:** Igor Golosnoy

## Requisites

Requisites are modules you must have before or at the same time as this module. For ELEC2232 there are no requisites.

## Aims

To introduce students to fundamental concepts of electromagnetic field theory from physical and application points of view. To equip students with basic experimental and modelling skills for handling typical electromagnetic problems. To increase the students’ confidence in vector calculus when solving typical practical problems.

## Learning Outcomes

- **A1:** Basic concepts of electromagnetic theory, including fundamental laws of electrodynamics (Gauss’s, Faraday’s and Ampere-Maxwell’s laws, Maxwell’s equations)
- **A2:** The interaction of electric and magnetic fields with matter
- **A3:** Principles of electromagnetic radiation, propagation of electromagnetic waves in vacuum and in media
- **A4:** Mathematical description of fundamental laws of electromagnetism, vector calculus in the electromagnetic field context
- **B1:** Explain the operation of simple electromagnetic devices
- **B2:** Apply mathematical methods and vector algebra to practical problems
- **C1:** Develop a mathematical model for the description of physical phenomena
- **D1:** Calculate electric and magnetic fields generated by charges and currents, compute energy and forces associated with electromagnetic fields
- **D2:** Derive equivalent circuits for electric and magnetic systems

## Syllabus summary

Vector calculus in the electromagnetic field context Electrostatics and steady currents, energy and forces in electric fields Magnetostatics and magnetic materials, magnetic circuits Time-dependant electromagnetic fields, electromagnetic induction, eddy currents, Maxwell's equations Principles of electromagnetic radiation, antennas and waveguides

## Learning and Teaching Summary

Lectures, Example classes, Interactive Tutorials

### Study Time

- Completion of assessment task: 36 hrs
- Follow-up work: 18 hrs
- Lecture: 36 hrs
- Preparation for scheduled sessions: 18 hrs
- Revision: 10 hrs
- Tutorial: 12 hrs
- Wider reading or practice: 20 hrs
- Total study time: 150 hrs

## Assessment and Feedback Summary

### Summative

This is how we’ll formally assess what you have learned in this module.

- **Method:** Assignment
- **Contribution(%):** 10 %
- **Group Work:** No
- **Method:** Examination
- **Contribution(%):** 60 %
- **Group Work:** No
- **Method:** Laboratory
- **Contribution(%):** 10 %
- **Group Work:** No
- **Method:** Assignment
- **Contribution(%):** 10 %
- **Group Work:** No
- **Method:** Assignment
- **Contribution(%):** 10 %
- **Group Work:** No

### Referral

This is how we’ll assess you if you don’t meet the criteria to pass this module.

- **Method:** Examination
- **Contribution(%):** 100 %
- **Group Work:** No

### Repeat

An internal repeat is where you take all of your modules again, including any you passed. An external repeat is where you only re-take the modules you failed.

- **Method:** Examination
- **Contribution(%):** 100 %
- **Group Work:** No

### Repeat Year

Internal & External

## Costs

Further costs are available on Blackboard.

## Health & Safety

There are no significant identifiable risks associated with this module.

## Resources

- **Electromagnetics with Applications** (Textbook)
  - Authors: John D. Kraus & Daniel A. Fleisch.
- **Engineering Electromagnetics, D.T. Thomas** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780080167787/engineering-electromagnetics.
- **Engineering Electromagnetics, Ida, N.** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-319-07806-9.
- **Applied Electromagnetism, P. Hammond** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780080163826/applied-electromagnetism.
- **Electromagnetism for Engineers, P. Hammond** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780080325842/electromagnetism-for-engineers.
- **Electromagnetism, I.S. Grant** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: http://web.a.ebscohost.com/ehost/detail/detail?vid=0&sid=7e0b2b93-536d-4d77-a321-8f07cd16978b%40sessionmgr4006&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#AN=594897&db=nlebk.
- **Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics, F. Ulaby, U. Ravaioli** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/soton-ebooks/detail.action?docID=5185886.
- **Introduction to electrodynamics, Griffiths, David J.** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/soton-ebooks/detail.action?docID=5137912.
- **Fundamentals of Applied Electromagnetics** (Internet Resource)
  - Link: http://em7e.eecs.umich.edu/start_here.html..
- **Laboratory space and equipment** (General Resource)
- **Software Requirements** (General Resource)
